What we have seen so far
are ways to divide a disk
into segments of usable
space using partitioning.
However, partitioning alone
does not make a disk
usable in the OS.
The disks and the partitions
are seen by the Linux kernel
as a raw disk.
To write to a disk or
a partition, we must first
create a filesystem.
The filesystem defines how
data is stored on a disk.
After creating a filesystem,
we must mount it to a directory,
and that's when we can read
or write data to it.
Now we will cover a few
of the commonly used filesystems,
the extended file system series
from EXT2 to EXT4.
Let's make a quick comparison
between EXT2, EXT3 and EXT4.
Both EXT2 and EXT3 allow
a maximum file size of 2 TB
and a maximum volume size of 4 TB.
These two filesystems do a great job
of reliably storing data.
The significant difference
between the two is that in EXT2,
in case of an unclean shutdown
such as one caused by
a power outage, it can take
quite some time for the system
to boot back up.
EXT3 file system, however,
did not have this drawback.
It implemented additional
features that allowed quicker
startup after
an ungraceful shutdown.
EXT4 further improves the EXT3
filesystem and is still one of
the most common general purpose
filesystem used today.
It can now support 16 TB
of maximum file size
and up to 1 Exabyte of volume size.
Another good thing about EXT4
and EXT3 for that matter is that
they are backward compatible.
An EXT4 filesystem can be mounted
as an EXT3 or EXT2 filesystem,
and similarly, an EXT3
can be mounted as EXT2.
Now let's create some filesystems.
We will make use of the /dev/sdb disk
to create an EXT4 file system.
To do this, run the mkfs.ext4 command
with the device path as the argument.
Once this is complete,
the filesystem can be mounted
on the system using the
MOUNT command as shown here.
Next, we can check if the file system
is mounted by either using
the DF command or by running
the MOUNT command again,
but without any arguments.
To make this mount be available
after the system reboots,
add an entry to the /etc/fstab
file like this.
The first field here is
the filesystem itself.
This is followed by
the mount point used.
The next field is the type
of filesystem, which in this case
is EXT4.
This is followed by mount options.
The most common one used is
the RW option, which allows
the filesystem to be
mounted Read-write.
This is followed by two zeros.
The first zero indicates whether
to backup the filesystem
using a dump utility.
It can have two possible values,
zero for disabling backup
and one for taking the backup.
This field is called the dump number.
The next field, which in this
example is also a zero,
is the priority set for
the filesystem check tool
to determine the order in which
the file systems should be checked
during a boot after a crash.
A value of zero means
the tool will ignore
the filesystem check.
This field is called
the PASS number and can have
values of zero, one, two.
One being the maximum is usually
set for the root filesystem.
Now let's play around with
filesystems with a hands-on lab.